Hello and welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
In this video, we will cover another
feature in the STP toolkit. This time, the
focus is Root Guard. As the name implies,
Root Guard guards the root bridge of the LAN,
ensuring that another switch with a lower bridge
ID can’t take over the role. It’s typically used
when connecting your switches to someone else’s
switches that you don’t have direct control over.
For example, if a service provider connects their
switches to a customer’s network, the provider
might want to ensure that the root bridge remains
in the service provider’s network. And Root
Guard can help with that. Let’s get started.
Here’s what we’ll cover. This is the third video
in the STP Toolkit section of this course. We’ve
already covered PortFast, BPDU Guard, and BPDU
Filter in the previous few videos. And now we’re
moving on to Root Guard, which prevents a port
from becoming a root port by disabling it if
superior BPDUs are received, thereby enforcing the
current root bridge. As I mentioned in the intro,
this can be very useful when connecting your
LAN to another LAN that you don’t have direct
control over. There is also one more feature in
the toolkit that you need to know for the CCNA,
Loop Guard. We’ll cover that in the next video.
So, why is it important to ensure that a specific
switch remains the root bridge? Before we look at
Root Guard, let’s see why it’s valuable. As
you know, STP prevents loops by electing a
root bridge, that’s SW1 in the network above, and
ensuring that each other switch has only one valid
path to reach it. In this network, SW2 has one
active path to reach SW1, the direct connection
between SW2 and SW1. And same for SW3, only its
direct link to SW1 is active. The link between
SW2 and SW3 is disabled to prevent loops. Any of
these three switches could be the root bridge and
STP would fulfill its role of preventing loops.
But you shouldn’t randomly select the root bridge.
Good placement of the root bridge is important,
and some things you should consider are optimal
traffic flow. For example, you should try to
minimize latency and congestion in the LAN.
Latency just means how much time it takes traffic
to travel through the LAN. And congestion refers
to how busy the network is. If you try to pump too
much water through a small pipe at once, it’s not
going to be very efficient. And the same principle
applies to network connections. So, with that in
mind, why did I select SW1 as the root bridge for
this LAN? Well, in most LANs like this, the PCs,
like those connected to SW2 and SW3, don’t
communicate with each other very much. Usually
they want to communicate with servers outside
of the LAN: over the internet, over the wide
area network, the WAN, etc. So, we want to ensure
that the PCs have an efficient path to reach R1,
their gateway to the outside world. And that’s
why I selected SW1 as the root bridge. Traffic
from hosts connected to SW2 takes the SW2-SW1
link. And traffic from hosts connected to SW3
takes the SW3-SW1 link. This is the most efficient
path for each host’s frames to reach R1. Another
consideration when selecting the root bridge is
stability and reliability. Once you select a root
bridge that provides an efficient path for traffic
in the LAN, you want that switch to remain up and
operational for as long as possible. So, if you
are using multiple kinds of switches in the LAN,
one of the more advanced and reliable switches
should be the root bridge. For example, if you
only have enough budget to buy a couple of new
switches, and the rest of them are old junkers you
found in the closet, you should make one of the
new switches the root, as you can probably rely on
it not to die out after a few weeks of operation.
So, those are a couple of considerations when
selecting the root bridge: optimal traffic
flow, and stability and reliability. Let’s
focus on the first one and see what happens
if we make a different switch the root bridge.
Now SW3 is the root bridge. What’s wrong
with that? Traffic from hosts connected
to SW3 takes the same path, but traffic from
SW2’s hosts now has to travel from SW2 to SW3,
and then from SW3 to SW1, before reaching R1.
This adds a bit of latency, as the frames are
taking a less direct path. But to be honest,
that’s negligible in most cases: probably less
than a millisecond. The true issue is that
there could be congestion on the SW3-SW1 link
if the network is busy. When a link is congested,
frames have to wait their turn to be transmitted,
and in the worst case some frames might be
dropped, and that could seriously affect network
performance and user experience. No one likes a
slow network. So, the point is that root bridge
selection is important, and after we’ve selected a
root bridge, we usually want it to remain stable.
Let’s expand the network to show how Root Guard
is useful. Within your own LAN, you can easily
control the root bridge by setting its priority
to 0. For example, here is SW1’s bridge ID. The
priority is 0, plus 1 for the VLAN ID. Remember,
Cisco switches run PVST+, so they always add the
VLAN ID to the priority. Assuming SW2 and SW3
have the default priority, this makes SW1 the
root bridge. And for the three switches on the
right, we’ll do the same for SW6, making it the
root bridge for its LAN. However, there are cases
where you might connect your LAN to other switches
outside of your direct control. For example, maybe
the LAN on the left is controlled by a service
provider, and the LAN on the right is controlled
by a customer. This is one example where switches
controlled by different organizations might be
connected. A service provider offering Metro
Ethernet service to customers. Metro Ethernet
isn’t something you have to study for the CCNA
exam, but it’s often used to connect sites
within a MAN, a metropolitan area network,
such as connecting offices within the same city.
So, what happens when the service provider and
customer connect their networks in this example?
Well, SW2 and SW3 will send BPDUs saying that SW1
is the root bridge. But SW4 and SW5 will also send
BPDUs saying that SW6 is the root bridge. So, who
is right? Which switch becomes the root bridge?
SW1 and SW6 each have the same bridge ID up to
this point: a priority of 1, and a MAC address
starting with 5254.001, but the next digit for
SW1 is “a” and the next digit for SW6 is “8”, so
SW6 has a lower bridge ID. And that means it will
become the root bridge. So, the lesson here is
that, even if you set your root bridge’s priority
to 0, its role can be taken by another switch
with a lower MAC address, like SW6 in this case.
So, with no safeguard in place to
enforce SW1 as the root bridge, SW1,
SW2, and SW3 all accept SW6 as the root bridge,
affecting the service provider’s STP topology.
Both the SW1-SW3 link and the SW2-SW3 link are
disabled. So, frames from SW3 to SW1 must take
a detour through the customer’s LAN. This
is obviously not an efficient traffic path,
but Root Guard can be used to avoid a situation
like this. Root Guard can be configured to protect
your STP topology by preventing your switches
from accepting superior BPDUs from switches
outside of your control. And a superior BPDU
is a BPDU with superior parameters when it
comes to the STP algorithm. For example, a
BPDU that claims a better root bridge ID.
SW6’s BPDUs claim a lower root bridge
ID than SW1’s, so SW6’s are superior.
So, if you want to ensure that the root bridge
remains in your LAN, you can configure Root Guard
on the ports connected to switches outside of
your control. We’re looking at this example from
the perspective of the service provider, so that
means SW2 G0/2 and SW3 G0/2, which are connected
to the customer’s switches. The command to enable
Root Guard on a port is SPANNING-TREE GUARD ROOT,
in interface config mode. Unlike PortFast, BPDU
Guard, and BPDU Filter, there is no command to
enable it by default from global config mode. You
can only configure it in interface config mode.
Now that Root Guard is enabled on SW2 and
SW3’s G0/2 ports, what happens when they
receive BPDUs from SW4 and SW5, claiming that
SW6 is the root bridge? If a Root Guard-enabled
port receives a BPDU, it will enter the “broken”
“root inconsistent” state, effectively disabling
it. We’ll examine what those terms mean
when we look at the CLI of these switches,
but basically this means that the port won’t be
able to forward frames and will discard any frames
it receives. All traffic is cut off. And SW1, SW2,
and SW3 won’t accept SW6 as the root bridge. So,
even though the service provider and
customer LANs are physically connected,
they can’t communicate. Before moving on, I
want to point out that SW2 G0/2 and SW3 G0/2,
as well as the ports they connect to on SW4 and
SW5, are all designated ports. Normally, there can
only be one designated port per link, but in this
case the switches disagree on who the root bridge
is. Just remember that in a normal, functional
spanning tree LAN, there should only be one
designated port per link. But this is a special
case, because Root Guard is blocking the link.
Okay, Root Guard prevented the customer from
influencing the service provider’s STP topology,
solving the problem for the service provider. But
that also means the customer can’t communicate
over the service provider’s network. How can
we fix this? To re-enable a port disabled by
Root Guard, you must solve the issue that
disabled the port. (CLUCK2)In other words,
the disabled port needs to stop receiving
superior BDPUs. To stop the superior BPDUs,
the service provider should tell the customer
to increase the priority of their switch. So,
the customer increases SW6’s priority to 4096,
plus 1 for the VLAN ID, and then what happens?
Once the superior BPDUs received by SW2 and
SW3 age out, the ports will automatically be
re-enabled. And how long does that take? Well, as
you already know, a BPDU’s Max Age is 20 seconds
by default. So, it should take about 20 seconds,
and then SW2 and SW3 G0/2 should be re-enabled.
And not only will they be re-enabled, but also
SW4, SW5, and SW6 will finally accept SW1 as the
root bridge. And the final STP topology might look
something like this. SW1 is the root bridge, all
other switches have one active path to reach SW1,
and the remaining links are blocked. So, the point
to remember here is that, to re-enable a port
that has been disabled by Root Guard, you don’t
have to do anything in the CLI of SW2 or SW3, the
switches using Root Guard. You just need to stop
the superior BPDUs, and then the disabled ports
will automatically recover. In this case, the
service provider told the customer to modify their
switch’s bridge ID, and then the issue was fixed.
Since Root Guard only needs a single command
to configure it, there’s not much to show in
the CLI. But let’s rewind a bit and look at that
process once more in the CLI. So, once again SW6’s
STP priority is 1, making its bridge ID superior
to SW1’s. I enabled Root Guard on SW2 G0/2 with
the command SPANNING-TREE GUARD ROOT. I’m only
showing SW2’s CLI here, but I did the same on SW3,
too. After issuing the command, a message is shown
saying that Root Guard has been enabled on the
port. So, what happens when SW2 and SW3 receive
BPDUs from SW4 and SW5? As this log message says,
Root Guard blocks the ports. Take a look at the
output of SHOW SPANNING-TREE. G0/2’s status column
says BKN, and on the right it says ROOT_Inc.
BKN means broken, and ROOT_Inc means Root
Inconsistent. A “broken” port is basically
disabled, it can’t forward or receive data
frames. And Root Inconsistent tells us why the
port is broken: it was disabled by Root Guard.
Let’s fix that problem by asking the
customer to increase SW6’s priority,
which is now 4097. After about 20 seconds, SW2
shows a message saying that G0/2 is now unblocked.
And as you can see here, its status is no longer
broken, and the Root Inconsistent message is gone.
So, the network once again converges with
SW1 as the root bridge. Before we move on
to summarize this video, I just want to clarify
where you should configure Root Guard. SW1, SW2,
and SW3 belong to a service provider, and they
want to ensure SW1 remains the root bridge. A
customer's switch shouldn’t disrupt the STP
topology by becoming the root bridge. Therefore,
Root Guard is configured on the ports
connecting to customer switches,
like SW2 G0/2 and SW3 G0/2. However, note that
you shouldn’t always configure Root Guard on
every port connected to another network. For
example, while the customer’s switches connect
to the service provider, the customer shouldn’t
configure Root Guard on their own ports. If the
customer configures Root Guard on SW4 and
SW5’s ports that connect to the provider,
those ports will just be disabled if they receive
superior BDPUs, blocking those links. And there’s
no point in connecting to a service provider
if you can’t communicate over their network.
Okay let’s summarize Root Guard. When selecting
a LAN’s root bridge, you should consider a few
things, such as optimal traffic flow that
minimizes latency and congestion, as well as
the stability and reliability of the switches. The
root bridge plays a key role in the spanning tree,
so it shouldn’t be a random decision. Within your
own LAN, you can easily control the root bridge by
setting its priority to 0. And if you have direct
control over all of the switches in the network,
there’s no need to configure Root Guard. But there
are cases where you might connect your switches to
other switches that are outside of your control.
The example we used in this video was a service
provider’s switches connecting to a customer’s
switches, which might happen when the service
provider is offering Metro Ethernet services,
for example. Root Guard can be configured on
specific ports to prevent them from accepting
superior BPDUs from other switches. For example,
a service provider’s switches generally shouldn’t
accept superior BPDUs from a customer’s switches.
You can use SPANNING-TREE GUARD ROOT to enable
Root Guard on a port, and there is no command to
enable it by default from global config mode.
PortFast can be enabled by default because,
in most cases, you want to enable it on all
access ports, because they usually connect
to end hosts. And BPDU Guard and Filter can be
enabled by default on all PortFast-enabled ports,
because those features are often used together.
But Root Guard isn’t the kind of feature that
you want to enable on ports by default. It should
only be enabled on specific ports where needed,
and that’s why it can’t be enabled in global
config mode. And what exactly does Root Guard
do? It prevents a port from becoming a
root port if it receives a superior BPDU.
Instead, the port’s status will be “broken” and
“root inconsistent”. Basically, “broken” means the
port is blocked; it can’t forward frames. And Root
Inconsistent tells us why it is broken: because
Root Guard blocked the port. But if the port stops
receiving superior BPDUs, it will automatically
recover. You don’t need to manually re-enable the
port, or use ErrDisable Recovery like with BPDU
Guard. Okay, that’s all for this video on Root
Guard. I hope it was helpful. Thanks for watching.